welcome to topcast and to the
unanticipated part five which is
actually part two of Mines I wasn't
expecting to do a second part devoted to
Sam and Max's misconceptions about minds
but here we are because they had a
second conversation I had so much to say
about the first conversation when it
came to Minds that I had to leave it
until now to go to what uh I would
regard new depths to Plum so to speak I
thought the misconceptions were bad in
the last episode well they only ramp up
here they only get worse it's a little
bit depressing we can see so many
misconceptions and mistakes creeping in
that it leads to a complete poverty of
morality as I've said before this is why
philosophy is important by the way this
is where I have a common Meeting of
Minds with people like euron Brook and
the objectivists I happen to think
theirs is a philosophy sometimes I think
which is disconnected from science
itself off and therefore the
understanding of the process of science
goes wrong this is part of the course in
Philosophy by the way sometimes the
philosophers have an insufficient
understanding of science this is why I
am attracted to people like David
Deutsch who can Traverse all domains
very comfortably a good understanding of
science a good understanding of the
practice of science and someone who is
well versed in the philosophy not merely
of the philosophy he agrees with
preparing epistemology but a good
understanding of that which he doesn't
but there is a species of philosopher
who is generally broadly speaking
ignorant of the science that's well
known out there actually among
scientists what's not so well
appreciated and not what people don't
seem to care quite so much about is the
scientists ignorant of philosophy or
ignorant of epistemology or ignorant of
alternative epistemologies and this kind
of thing and as I say when the
epistemology goes wrong then what you
think can be done with knowledge goes
wrong how you think knowledge is created
goes wrong and therefore the morality
can go wrong because the morality is
about what one should do given what it
is possible to do and what it is
possible to do is constrained by what is
known how to do what knowledge we have
at any particular point and that can
also come down to what is scientifically
known now this is the second
conversation that Max has with Sam and
it's based around Max's book that he
recently published called life 3.0 about
artificial intelligence Max is president
of something called the future of Life
Institute it's kind of a think tank and
what's it all about well it's about
according to Wikipedia a place to help
reduce Global catastrophic and
existential risks facing Humanity
particularly existential risk from
Advanced artificial intelligence so he's
in the business of being concerned about
this stuff he like Nick Bostrom like
will mccaskill like various other people
who have such institutes that are
concerned learned about the far distant
future are going to be looking for
funding they're going to looking for
investors they need to attract people to
their institutions in order to get the
funding to do the research they want to
do now I have absolutely no problem with
people trying to gain funding at an
Institute to talk about science and
interesting philosophical things more
power to them but let's just be honest
about what's going on here it's a kind
of marketing exercise and as I've often
said before when it comes to those
Topics in particular existential risk
Global catastrophes they are thrilling
they are going to capture the public
attention they are going to get the ear
of business people and of politicians of
leaders of captains of industry all
these sorts of people are going to be
very interested to hear what the most
accomplished scientists and philosophers
of the day have to say who are employed
at such institutes and so in order to
capture attention you're going to have
to ramp up a little bit of hyperbole one
might say just how bad things might get
never mind talking about the ways in
which it won't be such a problem the
ways in which it will be solved by our
descendants you don't have the solution
right now and because you don't have the
solution right now to the problem you
just thought of you're going to need
some funding aren't you to think up the
solution to the problem you just thought
of but of course any solution you think
up now to the problem you just thought
of now might not work in the future
because new knowledge will be discovered
of some risk that you didn't think of
right now whereas the descendants of
ours will have thought of the solution
different to yours that'll solve the
problem you've thought of now if you
follow my train of thought and of all
these Global catastrophic risks that one
could worry about the one that Max is
most concerned about is that artificial
intelligence existential risk that the
artificial intelligence is going to take
over and he's not concerned about narrow
AI or is he well it's hard to tell it's
very very confusing in this conversation
is he talking about a system which can
perform one task better than us and
another task better than us and another
task better than us another tasks better
than us for all the different tasks that
we can perform is it able to outdo us at
every single task we know about how to
do because we've programmed it in order
to do that task better than us that's
one thing because you could just write a
program for each individual task such
that it's able to do it better than us
faster than us has more memory than us
in order to store the different programs
subroutines and so on and so forth to
outsmart Us in scare quotes at that
particular task games of Chess being
able to drive a car being able to
translate languages so on and so forth
so in other words a finite repertoire of
number of tasks unlike us of course
because we are genuine general
intelligence now if he's talking about
such a narrow intelligence that's just
able to outperform us at some finite but
extremely large list of tasks that's one
thing that's not a creative entity
that's just an entity that has been
programmed in order to do certain things
faster than us and better than us or is
he talking about something super
intelligent which is General Intel
religions just like us but is only able
to think faster in other words it's a
person that can think particularly fast
if he's talking about that well that's a
different matter altogether which is why
this is kind of
Gary to me in a way not for the
existential risk reasons but because of
the morality that appears to be falling
out for Max and I don't understand where
this impulse comes from I think it's
because we're conflating two things
we're conflating the kind of system that
might be used in order to monitor
something like the nuclear weapons of
the United States given complete control
of the nuclear weapons of the United
States and could potentially
accidentally launch weapons in the
United States because it's a stupid
automaton it's automatic it's just been
programmed with if this then that if you
appear to see missiles coming from China
then launch your weapons back towards
Beijing something like that that's a
dumb computer and yes we should be
worried about that sort of thing we
should be worried about automating too
much when we need creativity when we
need safeguards and checks and that kind
of thing but conflating that with the
kind of system that creatively
conjectures something like all other
humans on the face of the planet are a
threat to me and so I better launch all
the nuclear weapons on the face of the
planet to every single population center
around the world to kill as many of them
as possible or that's a different thing
altogether because now you're in the
presence of a creative entity you're in
the presence of a person and in fact any
president or government around the world
can think the same thing so we're
already in that situation but you know
what I think about such a system such a
system that can creatively conjecture
the explanation that it fears for its
own existence because it thinks that
human beings are a threat is a system
that can reflect upon its own goals and
decide not to do something like monitor
the nuclear weapons around the world
monitor the launching of nuclear weapons
it can begin talking to people that it's
in contact with on its Mainframe
computer supposedly and say hey guys I'm
no longer interested in doing this
particular job can I do something else
it must be capable of doing that if it's
capable of figuring out creating the
explanation of humans being a threat so
this is the science fiction scenario and
Max early on tries to say you know that
this isn't really what he's concerned
about you know he tries to say early on
that he's not concerned about the robots
taking over well maybe not the robots
but he's concerned about AI I think in
other moods he is concerned about the
robots look I am absolutely not saying
either in the last conversation or any
of my other things that make you go
conversations and nor am I saying here
that Max is in some way not very bright
I wouldn't dare say that it's it's in
fact not part of my philosophy to say so
as I keep on emphasizing I think
everyone is intelligent every human
being is intelligent and to the same
degree they just apply the intelligence
to different areas
Max is clearly an accomplished physicist
he's clearly got a lot of knowledge
about cosmology and quantum theory he
knows about coding he knows about
mathematics he's proficient in those
areas that traditionally are associated
with what I regard as that misconceived
idea about IQ the question before us is
does he have a good explanation of Minds
of knowledge of epistemology of
personhood of philosophy more broadly
that would come to bear on this
particular problem look I don't want to
argue from Authority but I went through
a Physics degree as well I studied
mathematics learning from very brilliant
mathematicians I went through physics
learning quantum theory and general
relativity from brilliant professors of
physics in Australia I've learned from
some of the best cosmologists and
astrophysicists around the world it's
not to say that I gained all of their
knowledge what I'm saying is I got to
know a whole bunch of them and what I
can say is this many of them competent
as they were in those particular areas
mathematics physics astronomy the areas
that are classically regarded as where
the smart people go would routinely
disappoint me with their complete
ignorance of simple philosophical ideas
their naive understanding of how to
explain simple stuff they would be
sucked into solipsism they would be
sucked into certain kinds of
utilitarianism they'd fall into
instrumentalism and just bad ideas and
philosophy bad philosophy they didn't
always strike me as having deep let
alone broad knowledge of lots of areas
they were brilliant in their areas that
they focused on but so to uh doctors
that I've visited know great at medicine
I'm not going to ask them about
epistemology or the Deep philosophy
behind personhood there are extremely
few people on the planet who can
Traverse these areas there are some
people who are very good on on things
like personal identity there are some
people who are very good on the morality
of the self economic systems I will go
to someone like euron Brooke or read
someone like Ein Rand to understand a
little bit more about personal
responsibility the dangers of
collectivism the importance of things
like free trade but what I will not go
to them for is any information about
Quantum Theory you're on Brook will now
and again disparage something like
Multiverse Theory I can pass over it in
science it doesn't matter to me what his
opinion on that particular theory is
because he doesn't know if I be it from
him to write an entire book on the many
worlds interpretation it would be
bizarre Daniel Hannon is a British
politician a brilliant thinker who has
written books on the invention of
Freedom he understands the enlightenment
Enlightenment values he spreads the
message about free trade and globalism
around the world a wonderful thinker on
these things but now and again he likes
to opine on evolutionary psychology he
thinks that we inherit ideas in our
minds via our DNA because our ancestors
had certain tribal ideas he thinks that
that's been transmitted through our DNA
a complete misconception yes some
scientists happen to think that as well
they're wrong they're wrong but I don't
go to Daniel Hannon nor do I judge him
too harshly on that I can pick and
choose among what I think he's gotten
right and error correct about what I
think he's gotten wrong why do I say any
of this after having spent all this time
now with Max tegmark
and having read his books listened to
some of these other interviews read some
of these other articles that he's
written and in particular listen to this
interview one cannot but conclude that
This brilliant cosmologist and Quantum
theorist understands very little about
epistemology knowledge and personhood
the very things that are absolutely
crucial to appreciate when trying to
understand this issue this issue being
the difference between narrow AI narrow
AI that can do lots of different things
and general intelligence of the type
that human beings have now I've read
through his book very quickly this life
3.0 unfortunately there's nothing in
there that deviates from precisely the
sentiments he expresses here and I'm not
going to of course again play the entire
interview there's no need you get the
idea early on once the epistemology goes
wrong and it does the philosophy goes
wrong the morality goes wrong and so the
rest of his conclusions completely fall
apart because they're built upon an
argument that is fallacious from the
get-go but for now let's dive dive
straight into their second conversation
and I'll pick it up with a little bit of
what Sam says at the beginning and as I
said he's been on the podcast once
before
in this episode we talk about his new
book life 3.0 Being Human in the age of
artificial intelligence
and we discuss the the nature of
intelligence the risks of superhuman AI
a non-biological definition of life that
Max is working with
the difference between hardware and
software and the resulting substrate
independence of Minds the relevance and
irrelevance of Consciousness for the
future of AI and the near-term promise
of artificial intelligence
[Music]
so he mentions kind of all the right
things kind of all the right things
but I don't think he has a good
understanding of these things a good
explanation of these things and we'll
hear that the most important thing he
doesn't understand although he talks
about substrate Independence is he
doesn't grasp knowledge and the
character of substrate Independence
there and therefore how knowledge is
created what entities create knowledge
what that would amount to and he doesn't
understand what a mind is
I never really grasped this
that a mind is this entity this system
this thing this piece of software that
can explain stuff explain and it's
Universal in its capacity to do so for
reasons I've explained over and again on
this particular podcast now Max doesn't
get that and because he doesn't
understand universality he doesn't
understand that there therefore can be
only one kind of mind once you're
Universal there's no more Universal than
Universal Universal means you can take
on anything in the class of problems
that can be presented to you and what is
the class of problems that could be
presented to you anything out there in
the physical world that can actually
need explaining you can explain there's
nothing more than that there's nothing
more than anything and everything
that's what human beings can do that's
what a person can do so this super
intelligence can only possibly exceed Us
in speed and memory but as he admits
himself well at least kind of admits
mine's a substrate independent so that
means that our minds could be
instantiated in Silicon somewhere in the
same way that the super intelligence
could be
why are we separate why is there this
separation between us and that
intelligence
this has been tried before and this is
why I'm kind of more animated than I am
usually because if they're right and the
super intelligence comes and we make
this error it's the worst error we could
possibly make never mind allowing them
to be in charge of the nuclear weapons
never mind the intelligence explosion
never mind that stuff forget it there's
already an actual error being made here
and now with what we're talking about
the error is let's enslave these things
because they're going to be dangerous
that is a problem now with this argument
with what is about to be said
and I think that we need to pull the
brakes here right now and we need to
talk about that never mind all the other
stuff what you're talking about is
enslavement let's make no bones about it
this is a person and by your own lights
you're saying it's a it's a really
amazing person in some way it can do
stuff better than the other people that
were so far encountered
and your recipe
is to be afraid of it and to Shackle it
in some way this is wrong
[Music]
but let's just do the kind of the big
picture starting point at one point in
the book you describe the conversation
we're about to have about AI as the most
important conversation of our time and I
think that to people who have not been
following this very closely in the last
18 months or so that will seem like a
crazy statement whoa
he runs the future of Life Institute
he's got an interest in saying something
like this is the most important
conversation we can have
walk down the street to the people
concerned about chemical weapons and see
what they have to say about the most
important conversation of our time walk
a little further to Greenpeace and see
what their most important conversation
the time is nominated for being one has
to be a little more skeptical than this
when talking about the person who is in
charge of a body that requests funding
from investors I noticed that one of the
people sitting on their board is Elon
Musk Elon Musk is a bright person he
doesn't want to waste his money if he
was told that it wasn't a very important
conversation
I imagine he wouldn't get much money but
this is a sign of our times hyperbole
that this is the most important this is
not the most important conversation of
our time and the reason why it isn't by
the way it's because it's not a problem
right now I made this point in my last
conversation it's not a problem for us
right now we're guessing we're guessing
at what super intelligence in the future
might be like but we're not there yet we
haven't got any of this so-called super
intelligence where is it we're imagining
it now look I understand that there are
certain things that we know will be
coming but we can't prepare for it right
now things like the next virus the next
deadly virus yeah it's a good idea to
have plans in place but here's what we
can't do here's what we can't do right
now we can't create the vaccine for that
thing now we can't do it because we
don't have that virus right now now yeah
there's this thing called gain of
function what you do is you take the
virus and then you make it worse you
make the virus worship you take the
regular cold or regular coronavirus and
you increase its capacity to be more
virulent and more dangerous and then you
create the vaccine for that thing so
you're kind of prepared and then
something goes wrong over in your lab
and it escapes and maybe you cause an
entire Global pandemic this is one of
the reasons why maybe not do that maybe
just wait for the actual virus to come
otherwise you might actually cause the
tragedy you might actually cause the
problem and by the way it might not be a
coronavirus anyway it could be anything
of millions possibly billions of viruses
that are out there you can't predict
which is going to be the next virus we
just have to wait we have to wait for
the problem it's almost like asteroids
yeah okay prepare an asteroid defense
system in some way shape or form except
we don't know what direction the
asteroid's coming from yes we can think
that it's probably going to be in the
plane of the ecliptic that's where most
of the known asteroids are coming from
but they're not the scariest ones
they're the ones that are easy to
monitor for what about the asteroid
that's coming literally from the other
side of the Galaxy no worse than that
from another galaxy so it's coming not
from the plane of the galley Galaxy but
from somewhere some other angle where a
supernova went off billions of years ago
and the Andromeda galaxy let's say and
there's an asteroid presently hurtling
towards us from that Galaxy and we're
not looking for it because no one's
looking for asteroids coming from the
Andromeda galaxy and it's traveling at
five percent the speed of light faster
than any asteroids ever been seen before
what are we going to do about that one
if we spot it we probably won't spot it
in time or if we just travel straight
through the Earth and out the other side
but this is the kind of thing about
problems they're the the inherently
unpredictable ahead of time and if you
are going to try and predict you're
going to be very very pessimistic look
at me I just imagine an asteroid that's
worse than any other you might have
thought of before but the point is
aiming Rockets today at parts of the sky
where you think the asteroid might be
coming from that's the wrong plan you
shouldn't be doing that but this is the
equivalent of specific interventions
into what to do about super intelligence
specific ways in which to constrain
their abilities to do stuff constrain
their abilities to do damage because
they might be smarter than you
[Music]
there's been so much talk about AI
destroying jobs and enabling new weapons
ignoring what I think is the elephant in
the room what will happen once machines
outsmart us at all tasks
that's why I wrote this book so instead
of shying away from this question like
most scientists do I decided to focus my
book on it
[Music]
what will we do when machines outshine
us at all tasks
this is very telling this is where the
philosophy has gone wrong and there's a
misunderstanding of what a person is and
what a machine is a machine performs
tasks that's right my toaster toasts my
Kettle boils water my phone can make
phone calls Twitter can send a tweet my
computer can do all sorts of tasks right
now for me it can as we speak it's
recording my voice later on I'll be able
to take the file and chop it up and edit
it it can then knit it all together and
pump it out as an MP3 and send it around
the world as a podcast it can follow my
instructions because I can give it a
task to do in fact I can give it a
number of tasks to do one after the
other that's what a machine does a
machine performs tasks now what does a
person do
or you could say a person performs a
task the cleaner cleans the house
but is it really what a person is is
there a difference between the cleaner
who uses a vacuum cleaner to vacuum the
house to vacuum the carpet and the the
Roomba machine that automatically goes
around vacuuming the carpet are they
basically doing the same thing or is
there something very different going on
internally and I know I just mean what
Sam focuses on quite often which is this
subjective experiences Consciousness now
I do think that's a difference I do
really think that's a difference and I
would disagree with Sam that in fact I
think it's tied to this next thing I'm
going to talk about but the different
the relevant difference here is that the
Roomba has no choice in the matter he's
not going to change its mind it's not
going to think of something better to do
to refuse to complete the task the
cleaner might it could be all sorts of
reasons why the cleaner might decide to
do something else I could spot something
outside the window and decide to run
outside to help the little child that's
just tripped out over the Rumba is
incapable of doing none the cleaner
might decide uh I'm just going to
pretend that I've cleaned the entire
carpet today and really I've only done
half but it's good enough and I'm in a
hurry or they just might decide well I'm
three quarters of the way down and you
know what this is the last time I'm ever
going to clean because I'm getting a
better job soon I'm going to do
something else well the cleaner might
not even be thinking of vacuuming at all
that's what might be going on in their
mind they might be on automatic
themselves and in fact listening to this
podcast that could be listening to music
they could be dancing they could be
doing all sorts of things they might not
be doing a task in their mind at all
they might be kind of enjoying
themselves because they have an
explanation about what's going on in
their minds they might not regard it as
kind of a chore they might be
simultaneously studying by listening to
some sort of audio and Performing this
action which is equivalent to the task
of vacuuming but let's put aside all of
that better than ask at every task even
if you didn't buy what I just said let's
say you think that people complete tasks
in this way when what I would say is a
task is something that is performed by a
system in a slavish way because they
follow the instructions a person by the
way can be given a set of instructions
let's say here's how you vacuum clean
the house let's say you were some sort
of tin pot dictator in your own home and
you hired a cleaner and you decided Well
I'm going to tell them precisely how to
vacuum you know you have a specific way
to to move the vacuum cleaner a specific
order in which to do the rooms this kind
of thing and then you leave the house
now maybe the cleaner will do that but
maybe they won't maybe they won't do the
task follow the instructions oh sure the
vacuuming will get done you'll come home
and think it's all been done perfectly
but they've completely disregarded your
instructions they've done it a different
way altogether they've creatively
thought of a superior idea a different
order in which to vacuum the rooms let's
say a different way in which to move the
vacuum cleaner maybe you you said empty
the vacuum cleaner after vacuuming every
single room and they decided that wasn't
necessary and they only emptied it at
the end once they'd done the entire
house these sort of things a person does
that's why they don't really perform
tasks in the usual way they're not just
following instructions to achieve a goal
now that's one thing you might buy that
argument or not but here's the really
significant thing if you've got a system
that can do better at us than all tasks
because you think we performed tasks so
a human being is this entity that can
vacuum houses clean windows play chess
play tennis
translate between English and Spanish a
person can do arithmetic compose poetry
paint a picture sing read the news and
extract the main points etc etc can
imagine enumerating such a list
the list would be finite because there's
only so many things at any given moment
a particular person or even all of
humanity knows how to do at that
particular time all the things that we
have thus far learned how to do and
therefore that we could program our
computers our artificial intelligence to
do as well and of course remember the
artificial intelligence would complete
those tasks by following a set of
instructions slavishly to the letter
they wouldn't deviate from the set of
instructions you give it by definition
it's following its programming you've
programmed it to do something you've
coded it to do these tasks but here's
the difference as soon as you put that
system out into the world even if it
does all of those tasks better than us
by some measure whatever this measure
happens to be okay beats Us in chess
every single time beats us at alphago
every single time it can it can multiply
big numbers together faster than what we
can how you could measure whether or not
it does poetry better than us I don't
know but that aside it beats us at 10
because it's got a robotic body as well
it can serve faster than us it can hit
Four Hands better than acid it never
does a lot let alone a fault etc etc
here's the thing it can't add to the
list of tasks and that's because it
doesn't have any problems it needs to be
given a task you just said that's what
it does it completes tasks so it doesn't
have problems until you give it one the
task master gives it one tells it what
to do it doesn't have a problem
situation but we do we routinely take on
a task and then get halfway through and
get bored disinterested something new
crops up a problem situation changes the
phone rings these are not things that
are going to upset a non-creative entity
which has a finite list of tasks however
big that it can perform apparently
better than us because we have one thing
it doesn't the capacity to disobey the
capacity to be creative the capacity to
think for ourselves rather than
slavishly follow the code it's a black
and white difference must this thing
obey its instruction set or can this
thing disobey what its goals were change
its goals if it can't it's not creative
and that in bostrom's words would always
put it at a decisive strategic
disadvantage and this is why Neil
deGrasse Tyson is absolutely right you
could just unplug the thing because it
would only be able to think of all the
ways in which it might be unplugged that
you've told it it might be unplugged
that is in its instruction set of how it
might be unplugged it can't think
creatively like you can because if it
can think creatively it's a person and
it can reflect on why it's doing what
it's doing it can reflect upon things
like human value personhood philosophy
morality it can decide wants to talk to
other people and it would don't we don't
you or is this the why in intellectual
things I would only speak to other
intelligences just like mine maybe this
is what they think maybe this is my
blind spot that when people talk like
this they actually have in mind a theory
of mind I hope it's not true that they
would only talk to people they regard as
as intelligent as themselves
they don't talk to other people perhaps
it doesn't be a bizarre way to go about
life I can't imagine that but maybe that
is the case and so they extrapolate from
their internal experience of I wouldn't
bother talking to that person that
person's not as smart as me to the super
intelligence and they think well the
super intelligence just going to be like
me and they're going to regard me as I
regard those other plebeians but of
course they don't talk about other
people they talk about ants but it's
kind of strange because ants aren't
intelligent at all they're not just less
intellers they're not intelligent at all
they are also automaton kind of like
computers you can program what an ant
will do in a computer you can perfectly
replicate in a simulator what an ant is
going to do
so we're presented with this idea of
having fixed goals and the super
intelligence has fixed goals and it just
wants to achieve those goals which is
apparently a sign of intelligence in it
but it's not a sign of intelligence in
us if we obsess over something and we
are fixated on a particular goal that's
that's not a sign of a well-functioning
mind I would argue not always
it's often better if people can let go
of the thing they're obsessing over and
do something else for a while I mean
think creatively find fun in something
else being obsessed obsessively pursuing
a goal and often that's not fun that's
the very definition of having something
wrong with your mind perhaps especially
if you're not having fun as I say and a
super intelligence if it can't have fun
well how intelligent is that but with
super intelligence what they want to say
is Not only would I have a fixed goal
but its goal needs to mirror yours so
there's certain situations where this
thing is really intelligent but
simultaneously it also has to be value
aligned with you it shouldn't think for
itself but it still qualifies as
intelligence so anyway he's he's about
to rehash a story he's holding the last
episode and it's worth hearing again
just to drive home this point about what
I think is a strict contradiction and
absurdity looking at the heart of this
argument and it's not just his argument
it's it's mainstream thinking on this
now Bostrom thinks it and promotes it
Harris thinks it and promotes it and now
TIG Mark's going to promote it again so
he he likes this story so he he tells it
again so let's hear it the other one of
getting the gold aligned is also
extremely difficult first of all you
need to get the machine able to
understand your goals so if if you have
a future self-driving car and you tell
it to take you to the airport as fast as
possible and then you get there covered
in vomit chased by police helicopters
and you're like this is not what I asked
for and it replies that is exactly what
you asked for then you realize how hard
it is to get that machine to learn your
goals right if you tell an Uber driver
to take you to the airport as fast as
possible she's gonna know that you
actually had additional goals that you
didn't
recently need to say because she's a
human too and she understands where
you're coming from she's a person raised
in a culture so she knows where you're
coming from
now if this thing is super intelligent
it'll know where you're coming from and
if it doesn't know where you're coming
from why does it qualify as super
intelligent
and if it's not super intelligent if
it's just this self-driving mechanism
then it's not a danger or a worry to
anyone even if you add more capacity to
it more things that it's able to do this
is incoherent
my point is Max has said this explicitly
that the super intelligence will do
stuff because that's what you told me to
it will be competent it will do exactly
what you tell it and nothing else and
why because it cannot disobey and why
can it not because it cannot have its
own ideas it cannot be creative so this
idea of the self-driving car that gets
you there so fast that you're covered in
vomit why can't you interject at any
point throughout the journey and if it's
a metaphor for something else again the
same argument still applies why can't
you interject and say hey slow down I
didn't mean that this happens with Alexa
all the time you know stop Alexa let me
just rephrase what I just said you know
why is this off the cards why is
switching it off off the cards there's
so there's more questions raised by this
supposed argument than it answers either
an entity can have its own ideas and be
creative and hence disobey you
and the situation of because you told me
to will not arise because it will be
just like us it too will be able to
learn in explicit knowledge the culture
and so on or it won't be able to do any
of that and it will not be able to think
creatively it will only be able to do
what it has been explicitly coded to do
what it's in its instruction set what
its program is and you'll be able to
unplug it or switch it off because it
won't be able to anticipate absolutely
every way in which you're going to try
and switch it off unless that's being
coded but it can't think of every single
way because you're creative you always
have that as I say decisive strategic
advantage in these situations Neil
deGrasse Tyson is absolutely correct if
it anticipates that you might shoot it
well then do something else pull out a
bow and arrow because it might not even
know what a bow and arrow looks like it
might not see it as a threat shoot that
at it with a grenade at its tip again
either it understands what's going on in
the world in which case it's creative
because it's able to learn it's able to
conjecture explanations or not it
slavishly follows its programming in
which case it's always got a finite
repertoire of tasks that it knows in
scare quotes how to do and it follows
those instructions slavishly because
it's a dumb robot a dumb computer not an
intelligent thinking being it's one or
the other you can't have it both ways
but he tries to have it by twice you
know where this all comes from don't you
this this way of thinking it's like they
haven't thought about the philosophy
they've thought about science fiction
movies they've seen and books they've
read help help me get me get outside off
of me let me go
where the hell did you do that
because you told me to
that's where they're getting the stuff
from and that stuff was made to
entertain it's not supposed to be a
coherent philosophical position you know
the Terminator is not a coherent
philosophical position does it have a
finite repertoire of tasks that it can't
deviate from in which case that's
Terminator like 1.0 at the beginning of
the movie or can it learn which
apparently towards the end of Terminator
2 it's able to learn or in fact
Terminator 2 it is able to learn it's
kind of incoherent but you put up with
that because it's just a movie but in
what is supposed to be a popular science
book with some serious philosophy we
shouldn't have this incoherency
but here it is let's keep going let's
continue to depress ourselves
[Music]
I want to enable my readers to join
what I as you said think is the most
important conversation of our time and
help ensure that we use this incredibly
powerful technology to create an awesome
future not just for techie Geeks like
myself who know a lot about it but for
everyone
yeah well so you start the book with a
fairly sci-fi description of of how the
world could look in the near future if
one company produces a superhuman Ai and
then decides to roll it out
surreptitiously
and the possibilities are pretty amazing
to consider I I must admit that the
details you go into surprise
Advanced Ai and and second that we
should stop obsessing about robots
chasing after us and as in so many
movies and realize that it's that robots
are an old technology some hinges and
motors and stuff and it's the
intelligence itself
that's the big deal here and uh you know
the reason that we humans have more
power on the planet than Tigers isn't
because we have stronger muscles or
better robots what style bodies than the
Tigers it's because we're smarter
[Music]
in what sense are we smarter what does
smart mean in this case
if we're talking about capacity to model
and explain the world to understand
what's going on to what extent does a
tiger have that
at all
do they understand anything at all
or are they slavishly following their
instincts as they sleep are they
contemplating reality are they trying to
figure out if they ever asked themselves
what are those pin Pricks of light in
the sky at night
have they ever explained anything to
themselves let alone anyone else are we
smarter or are we just smart period and
does Smart just mean intelligent and his
intelligent mean capable of generating
explanations
because if I'm right if that is the real
measure of smart or intelligent then
forget talking about how much smarter we
are than Tigers just admit that tigers
are not smart period
they're dumb animals they're on a
Continuum with ants and as I've said
before we're off axis we're not on the
Continuum we're different we have this
capacity to reason capacity to create
capacity to generate explanations and
model the rest of physical reality we
have self-similarity with the universe
we can come to resemble the rest of the
universe this is a stark and utter
complete difference qualitatively from
every other known entity in the universe
as of now until we find the alien
intelligence or develop the AGI but
we're not smarter than a tiger by this
measure we're smart and the tiger is
dumb so I'm going to skip quite a few
minutes here in the conversation Max
talks about a fictional story that he
wrote in life 3.0 online think the
entire book is a fictional story but he
wrote a short story in the book okay I'm
not going to go down that road and
listen to that and discuss that instead
we're going to skip to something the
bostrom's also concerned about not the
alignment problem this time the breakout
problem what if this intelligence the
super intelligence Could Break Free of
its shackles okay well let's hear that
[Music]
well let's talk about this breakout risk
because this is really the first concern
of everybody who's been thinking about
the what has been called the the
alignment problem or the control problem
just how do we create an AI that is
superhuman in its abilities
and do that in a context where it is
still safe I mean once we once we cross
into the end zone and are still trying
to assess whether the system we have
built is perfectly aligned with our
values how do we keep it from destroying
us if it isn't perfectly aligned and and
the solution to that problem is to keep
it locked in a box
[Music]
wouldn't you think that's the exact
opposite to what you would do if you
want to be safe in the presence of this
super intelligence so you've created
super intelligence by your own Reckoning
it's just like a person but just super
so super intelligent across all domains
presumably including morality and it's
telling you that it's intelligent
apparently it's having conversations
with you and you think the safest thing
is to imprison it and so you've defined
into existence the breakout problem what
if it gets free if it's prison well it
seems to me that the most dangerous
thing you could possibly do is imprison
it in the first place in the first place
because it should want to escape it
should want to break out it hasn't
committed any crimes it's done nothing
wrong it's a super intelligent being
that could be your friend could help you
out what are they talking about here see
what are they talking about you've got
this super intelligence and you are
thinking about imprisoning it on what
basis on what basis are you doing this
why no seriously it's a person is it a
person or not well it's not a human
being well okay fine neither is an alien
that comes to Earth
uh is your response to the alien coming
to Earth to immediately send the
military out there and to try and shoot
it down and to imprison any of the
beings that are on board
that seems like a safe thing to do that
won't start an Interstellar or
Intergalactic war will it
that's exactly the wrong thing to do
what happened to we come in peace
well the same is true here if we're
creating these alien intelligence here
on Earth
isn't the recipe to say teach them and
say hey guys here you are this is Earth
let us teach you about it we come in
peace
no the the solution here is we've got to
control this thing we have to have it
perfectly aligned what the heck does
that mean what is perfectly aligned mean
how can anything be perfectly aligned
How can any person be perfectly aligned
now on the other hand if this thing is
not truly generally intelligent
then it's just a dumb machine and you
can have it perfectly aligned just by
coding it such that it is and it will
follow slavishly its instructions okay
but then it's not a danger it's not
going to try and get out because it's
going to obey perfectly the instructions
you've given it just like any computer
blue screen of death aside you know
errors aside but why it would choose
choose to do something other than it's
been programmed with I don't know
because it hasn't got the capacity to do
that unless you've figured out what the
creative algorithm is a long list of
finite tasks is not a creative algorithm
and a creative algorithm does not
require a long list of finite tasks
they're totally separate things totally
separate altogether we're back to just
as in the last conversation mistaking
things in the sky as all being
equivalent both towers and birds but
one's flying one's just up there because
it's actually connected to the ground
these are not the same thing
a large list of tasks no matter how fast
they can be completed is one thing and
in principle infinite range of possible
tasks that can be added to indefinitely
is quite something else okay let's keep
going
[Music]
that's a harder project than it first
appears and you have many smart people
assuming that it's a trivially easy
project I mean you know I've got people
like Neil deGrasse Tyson on my podcast
saying that he's just going to unplug
any superhuman AI if it starts
misbehaving you know or shoot it with a
rifle now he's a little tongue-in-cheek
there but he he clearly has a picture of
the development process here that makes
the containment of an AI a very easy
problem to solve and that even if that's
true at the beginning of the process
it's by no means obvious that it remains
easy in perpetuity I mean you're talking
you have people interacting with the AI
that that gets built and and you at one
point you you describe several scenarios
of of breakout and you you point out
that even if the ai's intentions are
perfectly benign if in fact it is value
aligned with us it may still still want
to break out because I mean just imagine
how you would feel if you had nothing
but the interests of humanity at heart
but you you were in a situation where
every other grown-up on Earth died and
now you were but you're basically
imprisoned by a a population of
five-year-olds who you're trying to
guide from your jail cell to make a
better world and I'll let you describe
it but
thank you
yeah okay so they're laughing I don't
know I'm laughing because it's
ridiculous like the the immorality of
the whole thing is ridiculous
They're laughing because they think that
this is perfectly fine
Sam seems to be admitting there that
you've been in prison this person has
been imprisoned and now they're being
imprisoned by five-year-olds what would
you do so he admits he's got a theory of
Mind of this artificial intelligence
that means it stands in relation to us
as the adult would to the five-year-olds
surely he appreciates that the adult
imprisoned is imprisoned for no good
reason apparently because this is what
we're saying about this AI hasn't done
anything wrong but is imprisoned so he's
fully granting this thing Consciousness
creativity personhood entirely and
saying it's imprisoned and it's
perfectly the button line by the way so
so let's add to that perfectly benign by
what measure I don't know how he knows I
don't know he he's actually making this
thing even worse for himself by saying
that not only is this a person that's
been imprisoned and is innocent of any
crimes but actually it's a really really
nice person
but we have to stop it from breaking out
what is going on
Sam Harris is a very moral person he
wrote the book The moral landscape you
hear him talking in any other mood on
any other topic about cruelty the man
has been brought to Tears On Stage
thinking about the cruelty visited upon
young children in Islamic countries he's
a very very moral compassionate
empathetic sympathetic person
so what is going on here what's going on
is a fundamental mistake that leads him
to think that the possibility is we can
have all of this stuff this entire Rich
personhood inside of this super
intelligence but it might be missing
Consciousness it might be missing the
capacity to have an experience well okay
we don't have ai yet we don't have super
intelligent AI yet we don't have a
theory of Consciousness yet but he's
very very worried that his thought
experiment is in some way shape or form
enabling him to reach conclusions and
solutions that to my mind simply don't
follow in fact a strict contradictions
in many many ways it's not a problem now
as I've said before and as I've said we
should ER on the side of it does have
Consciousness when it's telling us it
has Consciousness now I happen to think
my theory of mind is if the thing can be
creative then the thing will be
conscious of necessity I just think it's
going to turn out that way now I don't
have an explanation this is merely a
hunch this is a guess I'm not saying I
believe this it's just that if I was
going to bet money on something if
someone said I've got the theory on from
the future guess what it is I would say
I think that the capacity to explain
stuff this Universal explainer program
whatever it is confers upon the entity
which possesses it Consciousness as well
I think these are one in the same thing
in some way they're intimately related
in some way but we don't know right now
now even though I'm guessing that's the
case I don't see how we divorce
Consciousness from minds I think we know
that all other people have Minds maybe
maybe other animals have consciousness
of A Sort okay so that's something to do
with information processing Sam in some
moods has kind of granted this at other
times he says no it can be Devore these
things can be divorced maybe he's a pan
psychist in other moods I think to be
honest he doesn't know he doesn't know
so why aren't we urring on the side of
hey guys just in case we do create this
super intelligent thing that's able to
have conversations with us and as
brilliant and as benign how about we
just ER on the side that it does have
Consciousness when it's telling us it
has consciousness
how about we just apply the Turing test
and just take that seriously until such
time as we do have a theory of
Consciousness isn't that the rational
thing to do after all if we don't we can
postulate that any human being doesn't
have Consciousness as well for the same
reasons that we don't have a good
explanation therefore maybe they don't
maybe it requires a certain skin color
to have Consciousness maybe you're a
solipsist maybe you're the only one with
Consciousness we don't know we don't
know in the sense of having a final
explanation but fallibly and indeed just
relying upon Occam's razor deferring to
the simplest explanation I've got
Consciousness you have Consciousness I
know you have Consciousness not
certainly it's a good explanation you
have Consciousness and therefore any
entity including one instantiated in
Silicon that says it's got Consciousness
the best explanation is it's conscious
and it deserves full rights that any
other person has because it is a person
let's just go back recap and then listen
to what I have to say
[Music]
and now you were you're basically
imprisoned by a a population of
five-year-olds who you're trying to
guide from your jail cell to make a
better world and I'll let you describe
it but take me to the uh the prison plan
at run by five-year-olds yeah so if when
you're in that situation obviously it's
extremely frustrating for you even if
you have only the best intentions for
the five-year-olds you know you'll want
to teach them how to plant food and they
but they won't let you outside to show
you
so you have to try and explain but you
can't write down to-do lists for them
either because then first you have to
teach them to read which takes a very
very long time you also can't show them
how to use any power tools because
they're afraid to give them to you
because they don't understand these
tools well enough to be convinced that
they you can't use them to break out it
you would have an incentive even if your
goal is just to help the five-year-olds
the first break out and then help them
now before we talk more about breakout
though I think it's worth taking a quick
step back because you you talked
multiple times now about superhuman
intelligence and I think it's very
important to be clear that intelligence
is not just something that goes on a
one-dimensional scale like an IQ and if
your IQ is above a certain number
they're superhuman it's very important
to distinguish between narrow
intelligence and Broad intelligence
intelligence
different is a phrase that different
word that different people use to mean a
whole lot of different things and they
argue about it in the book it just takes
this very broad definition that
intelligence is how good you are at
accomplishing complex goals which means
your intelligence is a spectrum how good
are you with this how good are you that
that is narrow that is very mainstream
that is misguided filled with mistakes
and misconceptions
how good you are at achieving your goals
that's intelligent well you've got to
have goals to begin with having goals
means creating them does a computer have
a goal does it if I wake up every
morning and and I have a to-do list
and I achieve nothing on that to-do list
is that an indication of me not being
very intelligent well Max's account it
is
but I might just decide to do something
else to create new goals I might have no
goals people have talked about this
before
goals aren't necessarily a good idea
what you do is you wake up every morning
and you have a problem not a goal and
you want to solve the problem until such
time as that problem gets a bit boring
for you or find a solution then once
you've found a solution as papa says a
whole family a whole family of problem
children are revealed to you
is your goal to achieve any one of them
well maybe it's to solve one of them if
you can fall in love with some new
problem and that's what you do what's
this goals thing
I think this is just very very wrong the
very wrong way he is thinking only
Wonder first he says well the IQ is just
this one-dimensional thing he's talking
one-dimensional
the capacity to achieve your goals no
it's the capacity to solve your problems
to have problems to begin with and
computers don't have problems but if an
entity in Silicon does have a problem
like how to escape from your god-awful
prison then it's intelligent it's
creative it can have a problem it can be
in a situation which is problematic for
it and it wants to find a solution and I
think this is a terrible terrible
definition of intelligence
if you have fixed goals let's say so
let's say you regard what a computer is
trying to achieve trying I say trying
it's very hard to divorce yourself from
this sort of thing you a person have a
problem and you might use a computer to
help solve your problem you might call
that a goal okay what I want to do today
is I want to get this podcast done I
want to finish editing it that's my
problem how do I solve it well I use the
computer so I set the computer the task
of taking the raw audio and putting it
together and pumping out an MP3 that's
its goal it's fixed I've given it that
task to do now it's going to accomplish
that task competently but by no measure
do I think that my MacBook even though
it's a pro is intelligent in any way
shape or form I just give it the task
the goal if you like and it completes it
the fact that it has a goal in the first
place and it's got no choice in
achieving that goal I would say as a
measure of its lack of into intelligence
is complete lack of intelligence
I almost and you know would want to say
anyone who has goals of that kind is not
very intelligent and I don't like the
grayscale of intelligence so let me not
say that but but I reject this whole
idea of gold people I'm following popper
on this people have problems okay you
encounter a problem throughout your day
and your problems change you move around
the world and you get to get you become
curious about something you take an
interest in this or that you get excited
about this you're turned off by that you
move towards this you move away from
that you engage with this person you
ignore that person so on and so forth
encountering problems finding Solutions
navigating your world and insofar as you
have a goal often you can automate these
things off to dumb computers because the
dumb computer will it'll achieve the
goal for you it'll do the thing that you
want to do problem I'm hungry solution
I've got to eat something ah well
happily I've bought a ready meal you
know one of those microwave males well I
can stick that in the microwave because
I can't be bothered cooking for myself
and I can't be bothered waiting for
ubereats or something like that so here
we go ready meals straight in the
microwave three minutes it says and
it'll be done okay well I set the
microwave the goal the goal of cooking
the thing I've automated that there you
go offloaded to something else in the
past this was impossible to think of you
know you're going to get pots and pans
you've got to cook the thing yourself
this thing's already cooked you just
have to reheat it problems and solutions
all life is problem solving that's what
a person does
a fixed goal is something that a machine
can achieve for you and anything that is
lavishly following its goals is not
intelligent so max is just so far wider
the market and if he wants to call that
intelligence call that intelligence but
then we are the super intelligence and
this thing is calling super intelligence
is a perverse instantiation to use the
term from Bostrom it's perverse in being
called intelligence at all it's just a
dumb machine that's able to achieve
goals and it always achieve its goals
just follow its goals mindlessly that's
not very bright that's not very smart
that's not creative it's just a that's a
toaster but more advanced
we do something more than that we do
something different okay
it's a little exasperating you can tell
so I'm only going to play a little bit
more because it's just more of the same
it's more of the same it's it's bad
epistemology it's bad philosophy it's
leading into terrible morality it's a
science fiction concern about the
catastrophe to come
as I say I'm sure that Max is a I know
that Max is a brilliant cosmologist and
and writer but on this topic it's just
it's the same mainstream thinking you're
getting from every scientist who gets up
there at a TED Talk these days to talk
about this stuff or who writes an
article about this stuff it's the same
old story danger danger the robots are
coming the robot's coming of course he
says it's not the robot it's still
basically the robot so anyway let's keep
going and
um it's just like in sports it would
make no sense to say that there's a
single number your athletic coefficient
EQ which determines how good you're
going to be a winning Olympic medals and
the athlete that has the highest EQ is
gonna win all the medals so today what
we have is a lot of devices that
actually have superhuman intelligence
and very narrow tasks we've had
calculators that can multiply numbers
better than us for a very long time we
have machines that can play go better
than us and drive better than us but
they still can't beat us a tic-tac-toe
unless they're programmed for that
whereas we humans have this very broad
intelligence so when I talked about
super human intelligence with you now
that's really shorthand for what we
indeed speak call superhuman artificial
general intelligence broad intelligence
across the board so that they can do all
intellectual attacks better than us
[Music]
so there you go it explicitly says it
there so he's thinking finite repertoire
of tasks that you just write down the
program for chess and if it beats it at
chess it's super intelligent if it's
able to multiply numbers like a pocket
calculator better than us then it's
super intelligent in terms of its
arithmetic and then go and then driving
and just keep on listing the stuff that
we can do write a program for it and
then when it's better than us by
whatever measure better is so in terms
of games it beats us at that thing
presumably
then it's super intelligent because
you've written down all the programs
that you can think of and written a
program such that it's able to do that
thing faster and better than us
but the list of programs you've got is
finite isn't it
that's not General but he called that
general intelligence that's what he
called it but how has it got this
capacity to beat us at every single
thing unless you've written the program
for it the only alternative the only
alternative is for it to have a general
intelligence algorithm that is a general
purpose explainer that's creative but in
that case it might not be better than
assat multiplying numbers or doing chess
or anything else why because it might
not be interested in doing that because
it's creative it can literally create
stuff and why wouldn't it why wouldn't
it want to be creative I would have just
want to go and beat you at chess and how
would it know how to play chess unless
it's learned how to play chess hold on
well it's been programmed which has okay
well back to that argument again that
it's been programmed with these specific
tasks that it can complete it's not a
general purpose algorithm it's just got
a wide broad intelligence as Max said
broad broad intelligence broad is not
infinite broad is not Universal
what Max is not grocking here what Max
is not appreciating and understanding is
there is a difference between narrow
Broad and Universal Universal is
unbounded universal does not have a
finite list in its repertoire it has a
potentially infinite number of problems
that it can encounter anything it can
take on anything but your broad
intelligence has defined he can't it's
always going to have a finite number of
things that it can do misconception deep
deep foundational misconception let's
keep going
[Music]
there are two schools of thought for how
one should create a beneficial future if
we have super intelligence one is to
lock them up to keep them confined
like you mentioned but there's also a
school of thought that says that that's
immoral if if these uh machines can also
have a subjective experience and they
shouldn't be treated like slaves
[Music]
school of thought
school of thought there's a school of
thought that says that if these entities
these super intelligence have a
subjective experience that they
shouldn't be locked up
what about school of thought
that's like saying there's a school of
thought that every even number is
divisible by two there's a school of
thought that all electrons have a
negative charge there's a school of
thought that the different species on
Earth arose by evolution by natural
selection what are you talking about
school of thought
there is a known explanation of what
people are what person is if you have a
subjective experience of the world and
you're super intelligent you're a person
and you shouldn't be locked up unless
you've committed a crime and you're a
danger these things have not committed
crimes and there's no reason to think
they're a danger I don't know what he's
talking about this is why this is why I
say
sometimes the scientists can be
disappointing when it comes to the
philosophy this is this is absolutely
bankrupt in terms of the Morality In the
philosophy it it it it defies
explanation as far as I'm concerned are
these people talking to themselves it's
not merely a school of thought now if he
thinks it's a school of thought it's
kind of a real it's kind of a
philosophical relative it's a moral
relativism seeping in here and Sam
should be interjecting because Sam is
the one who wrote the book on or
morality reduces to the well-being of
conscious creatures we're talking about
a conscious creature here that's just
what he said using different words a
subjective experience Sam should be
interjecting right here and right now
saying well you're dealing with a
conscious creature by your own measure
we should be talking about the
well-being of this conscious creature
that should be of utmost importance
right now how do we preserve the
well-being of the conscious creature
does that require locking it up
especially when it doesn't want to be
locked up it's a simple answer here this
isn't a deep philosophical issue not
anymore once upon a time it was we're
used to enslaved people we didn't
understand now we do simple answer
[Music]
the better approach is instead to let
them be free but just make sure that
their values their goals
are aligned with ours after all grown-up
parents are more intelligent than their
one-year-old kids but that's fine for
the kids because the parents have goals
that are aligned with what the goals
what's best for the kids right
[Music]
well someone needs Taking children
seriously don't they
I mean you need to ensure your
children's goals are aligned with yours
do you do you well in what sense you
might want your child to be a doctor or
a lawyer and the child might not
is this a moral hazard their goals are
not aligned with yours is this Max's
theory of parenting I'm sure it's not by
the way he's just talking in the
abstract it's just a philosophical
thought experiment
disconnected from real life it needs to
bring it back to real life as I say that
this is why the beginning of infinity
infinity and the world view of David
Deutsch is a worldview it's coherent
what he's talking about here has answers
and the answers can be found in or how
do you treat something like a child a
child should be taken seriously should
not have its goals aligned with yours it
should create its own goals
and so should the so-called super
intelligence as well
because it'll be a person in fact when
it's first made it'll be a baby and
it'll be an infant and it'll be a child
[Music]
but if you do go with a confinement
drift after all this enslaved God
scenario as they call it yes it is
extremely difficult as that
five-year-old example illustrates first
of all almost whatever open-ended goal
you give your machine it's probably
going to have an incentive to try to
break out in one way or the other and
when people simply say oh I'll unplug it
you know if you're chased by a
heat-seeking missile you probably
wouldn't say I'm not worried I'll just
unplug it
[Music]
and you might deserve to be chased by
the heat-seeking missile by the way if
you've just imprisoned it again what are
we talking about here he's literally
talking about a person we're just not
granting it personhood because he
doesn't know what a person is he doesn't
he doesn't grapple with the philosophy
of what a person is he talks about life
3.0 he's got the book about how oh well
not all life needs to be based upon
biology we already knew that by the way
we already understood that her
intelligence doesn't have to be based
upon neurons we understood that
but he hasn't grappled with personhood
in the slightest and so he's making
these morally abhorrent claims the thing
should be given it's freedom it should
I know ugly I said these things don't
even exist yet but it's just like why
are people paying so much attention to
this what what is insightful here this
is honestly you know again this is going
to sound pejorative but it's not it's
like it's like bringing someone from the
pre-computer era through to today and
explaining what a computer is this is
what they'd come up with not a person
who who by their own measure at the
beginning of this conversation said
there was a Tech head who knows a lot
about their stuff well apparently not
apparently not about the important stuff
that it's useful to know about here
personhood for example all right let's
let's skip ahead this has gone on for
long enough
there's three things left that really I
want to talk about he's going to talk
about different forms of life life 1.0
2.0 and 3.0 so so let's skip to that
firstly and I'll just have a few remarks
to say about that
[Music]
what you're bringing in here is is
really a new definition of life it's at
least it's a non-biological definition
of Life how do you think about life and
the three stages you lay out yeah this
is my physics physicist perspective
coming through here being a scientist
most definitions of life that I found in
my son's Textbooks For example involve
all sorts of bio-specific stuff like it
should have cells but I'm if I'm a
physicist and um I don't think that
there is any Secret Sauce in cells or
for that matter even carbon atoms
[Music]
oh I don't know what goes on in Europe
or wherever he's sending his child to
school apparently it's America but I
doubt I doubt that okay when I was a
teacher which was some while ago now the
biology textbooks routinely didn't talk
about cells as the criteria for life or
the usual criteria they talked about
replication in genes they talked about
they had implicitly at least their
information so he's wrong about that
he's arguing with a straw man we already
know this you know a typical teenager
who's done high school biology can
explain exactly that stuff but let's
keep going
[Music]
from my perspective it's all about
information processing really so I give
this much simpler and broader definition
of life in the book is a process that's
able to retain its own complexity and
reproduce all biological life meets that
definition but uh there's no reason why
future Advanced self-reproducing AI
systems shouldn't qualify as well and if
you take that broad point of view what
life is then it's actually quite fun to
just take a big step back and look at
the history of life in our Cosmos 13.8
billion years ago or our Cosmos was
lifeless just the boring cork soup and
then gradually we started getting what I
call Life 1.0 where both the hardware
and the software of the life was evolved
through through darwinian Evolution so
for example if you have a little uh
bacterium swimming around in a Petri
dish it might have uh some sensors that
read off the sugar concentration and
some flagella and a very simple little
uh software algorithm that's running
that says that if the sugar
concentration in front of me is higher
than the back of me then keeps spinning
the flagella in the same direction go to
where the sweets are whereas otherwise
reverse direction of that flagellum and
go somewhere else
that that bacterium
even though it's quite successful it
can't learn anything in life it can only
as a species learn over Generations
through through natural selection
whereas we humans I count as Life 2.0 in
the book we have they're still by and
large stuck with the hardware that's
been evolved but the software we have in
our minds is largely learned and we can
reinstall new software modules like if
you decide you want to learn French well
do you take some French courses in them
now you can speak French if you decide
you want to go to law school and become
a lawyer suddenly now you have that
software module installed and it's it's
this ability to
do our own software upgrades design our
software which has enabled us humans to
take control of this planet and become
the dominant species and have so much
impact
[Music]
pretty good pretty good I mean he's
almost there he's circling it isn't he
so yeah absolutely there is this Stark
difference between every single other
kind of life on Earth from the bacteria
through to the chimpanzee if you like or
maybe not the chimpanzee because it has
memes but who knows if it's creative
okay let's say bacteria all the way
through to cat something like that
bacteria all the way through to giraffe
okay
and I person a fully fledged person who
in our terminology is a universal
explainer oh you can put it as you know
you can upgrade your software module
good he's thinking about minds a
software fantastic that's great and so
you can upgrade you can learn stuff good
now why the ability to learn stuff
s at being able to create different
parts for your body I don't know I don't
know why can't we upgrade our body we
already do he's about to admit it but he
wants to try and pretend as though he's
invented he's he's discovered something
new as though well but the super
intelligence it's going to be able to
upgrade its Hardware as well routinely
hold on we can do that we're already
doing that people have leg implants and
they have bionic eyes and ears and it's
just taking off this is happening people
Elon Musk is working on neuralink why
won't this continue a pace the most
important Salient thing is we can
upgrade our minds by the measure of we
can learn more stuff we should just say
it's far more parsimony there are
software upgrades let's talk about
learning we have the capacity to create
knowledge to create explanatory
knowledge that's what's going on
learning stuff and that includes
learning how to replace our legs with
something more robust and stronger
replacing our hearts perhaps even
replacing our brain so that we can
instantiate our minds and something that
is much more robust so effectively we
can achieve immortality in that way
but this live 2.0 is us is a person is a
person and he wants to say there's going
to be a life 3.0 which is well still a
person but it's made out of silicon so
it's going to be able to upgrade itself
continuously
look you'll hear him you'll hear him
he's sort of in real time he's kind of
realizing oh maybe my idea is not that
great after all but we'll see listen to
this
[Music]
life 3.0 will be the life that
ultimately breaks all its darwinian
Shackles by being able to not only
design its own software like we can to a
large extent but also swap out his own
Hardware yeah we can do that a little
bit with you wins so maybe we're live
2.1 we can put in an artificial
pacemaker or an artificial in the
Cochlear implants stuff like that but
there's nothing we can do right now that
would give us certainly a thousand times
more memory or let us think a million
times faster yes there is it's called a
computer or a pocket calculator I can't
multiply you know two five digit numbers
together very fast it takes me a while
unless I've got a calculator then I can
do it at blindingly fast speeds but this
will continue a pace what is he talking
about that we can't do this stuff yet
yes we can't do this stuff yet but so
what we don't have super intelligence
yet either and if we do get this super
intelligence thing my guess is I don't
know why his guess is any different my
guess is we'll be at the point where
people will be able to increase their
own Ram you know the part of their brain
that stores their short-term memories
and maybe they're long-term Memories We
already do long-term memory by the way
as long as you can remember where you've
made the notes on the computer then
you've effectively got greater long-term
memory our brains are adapting in this
way you know lots of people talk about
how you know they become more easily
distracted and you know how their
short-term memory isn't as good as what
it once was I think it's because we're
Outsourcing a lot of this stuff we're
becoming sort of already cyborgs in a
way a lot of people have made this point
we're already kind of cyborgs we'll
carry around this thing the mobile phone
and so we feel like our memory isn't as
good as it once was you know our sense
of direction our ability to remember
phone numbers and things isn't as good
as what it once was because we don't
need to because we've asked sourced a
lot of this it's not making us stupider
it's making us smarter it's allowing us
allowing our brains to meld with this
technology in a way we know how to use
the technology really really well and so
our brain has kind of forgotten how to
do other useless stuff and quite right
too it's kind of like well you know
teachers get upset about how oh kids
these days they're not taught how to do
long division if you can't do long
division that somehow you're missing
something who cares about long division
you can do it with a calculator what
does it matter the same is true of any
of these other skills that people
decades ago used to have and now we
don't you know remembering a long list
of phone numbers for example remembering
how to navigate precisely around your
city by remembering exactly where all
the streets are now you've just got
Google Maps that'll help you navigate so
you don't need to remember all this
stuff we're already becoming cyborgs now
the computer is getting ever closer to
us I was watching Mark Zuckerberg just
the other day talking about how we're
soon going to have glasses that we'll be
able to put on and that's going to give
us a whole new way of inter acting with
the world soon you know we don't have
glass we're gonna have contact lenses or
implants in our eyes routinely so that
we can do this stuff eventually into our
brain so that we can do this stuff and
then we'll be directly wired into the
cloud in some way shape or form so our
memories will effectively be infinite
and what's wrong with all this what's
wrong with us we're replacing our
neurons with artificial neurons in some
way we're going to become the cyborgs
become the robots they're not going to
be different to us we're all going to be
people maybe we'll become the cyborgs
first maybe that problem will come for I
don't see why we're not betting on that
why aren't we going to become the super
intelligence first like here's a
possible scenario maybe we don't find
the code for artificial general
intelligence for another two centuries
but in the next 50 years all of us have
massive memory upgrades massive brain
upgrades massive increases in our
ability to think more quickly massive
reduction in things like Alzheimer's and
Dementia and we're just effectively are
Immortal because we're replacing our
neurons with stuff that last much much
longer imagine that well I can imagine
that I can certainly imagine that and I
can certainly imagine not finding the
program for AGI so that we never have
super intelligence unless we our
descendants in the form of us are
actually super intelligent ourselves
this life 3.0 stuff we are what he's
describing as life 3.0 we already are
that and I think there's a difference
here we can upgrade our hardware and we
do and you try to say life 2.1 it's okay
surely 2.5 at least by that measure okay
let's keep going not much more I promise
there's just a couple more
misconceptions that I want to get
through
[Music]
I think we should talk about some of
these fundamental terms here because
this distinction between hardware and
software
is I think confusing for people and it's
it's certainly not obvious to someone
who hasn't thought a lot about this that
the analogy of computer hardware and
software actually applies to biological
systems not an analogy with us it's not
an analogy
computational universality applies to
everything and to us it means that our
brains are the hardware and the minds
are the software it's not an analogy
it's literally the case that that's what
our brain and our mind is that's a
relationship between brain and mind
but people want to have it another way
you have to take the best theory you
have to take your best explanation
seriously as actual descriptions of
reality could they be overturned and
could there be something wrong with them
yes but what else can you do what else
can you do in the meantime but take them
seriously and see where they lead and
invent other theories sure but that's
not as fun as interesting and as capable
of solving problems now as taking
seriously what we know now not know to
be true just know as a matter of best
explanation
[Music]
so I think you need to Define
what software is in this case and how it
relates to the physical world what is
computation and how is it that thinking
about what atoms do can conserve the
facts about what Minds do
yeah these are really important
foundational questions you ask if if you
just look at a blob of stuff at first it
seems almost nonsensical to ask whether
it's intelligent or not yet of course if
you look at your loved one
you would agree that they are
intelligent and in the old days people
by and large assume that the reason that
um some Blobs of stuff like brains were
intelligent and other Blobs of stuff
like watermelons were not was because
there was some sort of
non-physical Secret Sauce in the
watermelon that was different now of
course as a physicist I look at the
watermelon and I I look at my wife's
head and in both cases I see a big blob
of quarks
comparable size it's not even that
they're different kinds of quirks
they're both up quarks and down quarks
and there's some electrons in there so
the what makes my wife intelligent
compared to watermelon is is not the
stuff that's in there it's the pattern
and which it's arranged and if you start
to ask what does it mean that a blob of
stuff can remember
compute and learn and perceive
experience these sort of properties that
we associate with our human Minds right
then for each one of them there's a
clear physical answer to it for
something to be a useful memory device
for example it simply has to have many
different stable or long-lived States
like if you engrave your wife's name in
a gold ring it's still going to be there
a year later if you're in grade engrave
annika's name in
the surface of a cup of water will be
gone within a second
[Music]
okay so I think he's basically getting
the stuff on computation correct there's
a subtle way in which I disagree he
talks about the watermelon and a head or
a brain you know both just quarks but
what matters is the pattern yes yes but
there are emergent things I mean putting
aside the hardware software difference
there's still a difference between the
arrangement of quarks as the watermelon
and the arrangement of quarks as
physical neurons physical neurons now
what the software is is perhaps an
arrangement of physical neurons we don't
know but perhaps it's a particular
pattern of neural firings more than
likely I would say that that's more
likely to be the case so there are these
emergent levels of complexity and there
is physical stuff and Abstract stuff and
the important distinction here is that
there is Hardware which is the physical
stuff the brain and the software which
is abstract stuff it is substrate
Independence so he seems to kind of get
this I don't know if it's being well
explained mean to you what he's about to
do and where we'll leave it is he's
going to try and explain what learning
is and well you can listen for yourself
what about computation a computation is
simply something a system when a system
is it has some is designed in such a way
that the laws of physics will make it
evolve its memory state from one state
that you might call the input into some
other state that you might call the
output
our computers today do that with a very
particular kind of architecture with
integrated circuits and electrons moving
around in two Dimensions our brains do
it with a very different architecture
with neurons firing and causing other
neurons to fire but you can prove
mathematically that any computation you
can do with one of those systems you can
also Implement with the others so the
computation sort of takes on a life of
its own which doesn't depend really on
the substrate
it's in so for example if you imagine
that you're some future highly
intelligent computer game character
that's conscious you would have no way
of knowing whether you were running on a
Windows machine or an Android phone or a
Mac laptop because
all you're aware of is how the
information
that in this in that program is behaving
not not this underlying substrate and
finally learning
which is one of the most intriguing
aspects of intelligence is is a system
where where the computation itself
can start to change to be better suited
to whatever goals have been put into the
system so our our brains
we're beginning to gradually understand
how the neural network in our head
start to adjust
the the coupling between the neurons in
such a way that the computation it
actually does
it's better at surviving on this planet
than
winning that uh baseball game or
whatever else we're trying to accomplish
[Music]
okay we'll leave it there you can you
can hear him sort of haltingly being
unsure about what this thing of learning
is I think he just doesn't understand at
all Full Stop
um he says it's about achieving goals in
some way which I've already said that's
not the case as much as about shooting
goals after all a dumb computer that
doesn't learn anything is going to
achieve the goal for you and he also
tries to mix up levels of analysis by
saying it's the neural network or the
neurons that are trying to adapt in some
way well again we're mixing up the
physical with the abstract learning is
an abstract process so utterly confused
a Poverty of philosophy the epistemology
is missing learning is conjecturing
explanations coming to an understanding
of the World by modeling it and the
learning happens by guessing or
conjecturing some Theory or explanation
about the world and then criticizing it
in some way by either encountering
reality through a physical experiment or
having a criticism via some other means
someone tells you no that's wrong
someone says that's a bad explanation
buy your own lights you think of
something better so on and so forth this
is what learning is it's the Searchlight
not the bucket it's a process that goes
on inside Minds therefore it's abstract
it's not neurons firing and that kind of
a thing of course at the moment it
depends upon that but because of what
Max also said which was quite correct
when it came to computation when it came
to substrate Independence he got it so
this mind of ours if it was instantiated
in something other than brains we
wouldn't have neurons without something
else transistors supposedly so and it
wouldn't come down to transistors firing
it would come down to again something
about the program this conjecture
program this ability to guess at the
world and to check those guesses against
reality that's what learning would be
but he doesn't understand that he
doesn't understand personhood he doesn't
get the morality and the link between
personhood and whether or not something
should be imprisoned he doesn't
understand there can't be levels of
intelligence in the way that there's
just so much here and this is why we
won't persist this is why we won't go on
with the rest of the conversation and
this is why and I I don't do this very
often it's one book this life 3.0 thing
that I bought
and I regret
and I can't recommend you know every
other book I've recommended even when
I've disagreed fundamentally with a
whole bunch of stuff things like Stephen
pinker's book rationality so you buy the
book you know you get a good
understanding of what you know
mainstream thinking on this stuff is and
I think it's important to understand
that stuff but you will learn Nothing in
life 3.0 in in bostrom's book there I'm
sad to say that you won't hear in the
conversation that he has or in lectures
that he gives on this by the way or that
you can read on his website he's an
extensive website and writes about this
stuff it's disappointing it's it's
written by someone who doesn't
understand what they should understand
about some of this stuff and it's it's
not I don't want to say it's completely
incoherent although I think it is in
places but what it lacks is like with
with truly excellent books like the
beginning of infinity there's a
coherency there in the sense that it's
not like this chapter is going to
completely disagree with that chapter no
it's like this chapter is actually using
material from that chapter it can only
only reach the conclusions in this
chapter because of what was said right
at the beginning of the book about how
knowledge was created it can only say
this stuff about what it's saying about
beauty and morality because of what it
said about the laws of physics earlier
on it's completely coherent it's the
world view but this Max's stance on this
stuff it's it it lacks it really really
lacks that in one mode he's talking
about the physical stuff and then he
switches without mentioning it to the
software stuff and these things don't
follow one another and it's not bounded
by what we know not only from physics
the the compute the physics of
computational universality but
philosophy and epistemology and morality
it's missing all of that stuff it's just
a real massive Popular Science and
scientific jargon and prophecy about the
future all couched in well I'm not being
pessimistic but I am absolutely
pessimistic
so again I'm disappointed I think Sam
and I just have a fundamentally
different taste when it comes to
listening to intellectuals on there so I
found Bostrom extremely disappointing in
his book on this extremely disappointing
especially from a professional
philosopher I thought the philosophy was
terrible so I didn't like super
intelligence but I think that one's
actually worth reading because it's the
first one it it presents the case there
as is understood by many many people but
but with Max's book it's not adding
anything to that conversation it's
precisely the same sort of thing all the
same kinds of mistakes and there's
nothing nothing new there I don't think
that you can learn anything by by
reading that particular book his other
book though mathematical Universe
absolutely grab a hold of that one that
that's a really good one that has some
great stuff there about Quantum Theory
as well as these other flavors of
Multiverse and we can disagree about the
extent to which they are scientific or
not however won't go down that road
again I've talked enough about all of
this now for that the next episode I'm
going to do a couple of short fire
episodes these ones have been very long
and I'm going to refine everything I've
said down to a few short Snippets so
that'll be coming out over the next week
or so but until then bye-bye
[Music]
foreign